
From Astronomy Today, 8th Edition.
Ch. 11 RD 11,13,14
Ch. 12 RD 6,8,9,10,12,14,15
Ch. 13 RD 8-14 even

Ch. 11
11) What is the cause of Io's volcanic activity?
Io’s interior must be very hot in order to support the volcanic activity 
observed. This energy comes from tidal stresses caused by the small but 
significant gravitational conflict between Jupiter and Europa and Ganymede. 
When Europa and Ganymede are close to Io, their gravity disrupts Io’s orbit 
and spin, so that Io does not have a perfectly synchronous orbit. This causes 
Io’s tidal bulge to “wobble,” and the resulting friction creates heat, which 
keeps Io’s interior molten. Because of an unusual resonance between the 
orbits of the three moons, they line up and pass close to each other 
rhythmically every 7.15 days; this rhythm enhances the tidal heating.

13) How does the cratering vary among the Galilean moons? Does it
depend on their location?  If so why?
  	Io has no impact craters because its volcanism continually fills in 
any features on the surface. Europa has very few impact craters; its icy 
surface is also subject to resurfacing. Ganymede and Callisto both show 
significant cratering, with Callisto showing the most. The inner moons may 
be tidally disrupted by the other moons, and therefore will be actively 
generating internal heat to drive activity. The outer moons could not 
suffer this disruption, and so have mostly solid interiors and little to 
no surface activity to modify craters.

14) Why is there speculation that the Galilean moon Europa might be an
abode for life?
	Europa appears to be filled with an “ocean” of liquid water 
beneath the thin icy crust. If this is true, its ocean might be suitable 
for supporting life.

Ch. 12
[ 2)  Why do Saturn's rings sometimes seem to dissappear?
  A ring crossing occurs when the Earth "crosses" into the plane
  of Saturn's rings.  When this happens, we view the rings edge-on,
  and they appear to vanish from our view because they are so thin.
  The last one occurred around 2009-2010 and the next should be
  around 2024. ]

6) When were Saturn's rings discovered? When did astronomers realize 
what they were?
	Although Galileo saw the rings in 1610, he could not tell they 
were separate from the planet; Saturn looked oblong to him, or like it 
had “ears.” Christiaan Huygens in 1655 was the first person to have a 
good enough telescope to actually see the rings as a flat disk in
the equatorial plane of the planet.  Later, Cassini could see a gap
in the rings, suggesting they weren't radially continuous or solid.
It wasn't until the 20th century that we confirmed that they are
composed mostly of water ice fragments.  

8) What evidence supports the idea that a relatively recent catastrophic
event was responsible for Saturn's rings?
Our models and simulations of rings systems indicate that collisions 
between ring particles can destroy a ring system in a much shorter time 
than the age of the solar system. The collisions would pulverize ring 
particles, and much of the debris would fly out of the ring system, 
into Saturn, or into outer space. If this is the case, then the elaborate 
ring system of Saturn had to have been formed recently, or replenished 
by new material, in order to still be so extensive today.

9) What effect does Mimas have on Saturn's rings?
Mimas is the cause of the Cassini Division. Any ring particle in the 
Division has an orbital period exactly twice that of Mimas. It therefore 
feels a gravitational pull from Mimas at the same place in its orbit 
every time it is closest to Mimas. This rhythmic gravitational “tug” 
disrupts the orbit of the ring particle and moves it into an orbit 
outside of the Division, where Mimas can no longer affect it.

10) What are shepherd Satellites?
Shepherd satellites are very small moons that use their gravities to 
“shepherd” ring particles into narrow orbits. Usually there are two 
moons involved, one on each side of a thin ring. If a ring particle 
moves too slowly to stay in the ring, one moon speeds it up a little 
with its gravity. If a particle moves too fast, the other moon will 
slow it down. This causes very thin rings to form. For example, 
Prometheus and Pandora are two shepherd satellites shaping the F ring.

12) Why does Titan have a dense atmosphere, whereas other large
moons of the solar system don't?
Although a larger moon like Ganymede may have a stronger gravity than 
Titan, Titan has an advantage in being farther from the Sun, and 
therefore much cooler, about 94 K. The low temperature means that 
atmospheric molecules have very little energy and cannot move fast 
enough to get away from Titan. The low temperature would also allow 
Titan to have formed out of material rich in methane and ammonia, 
materials that condense or freeze at this temperature, but would be 
mostly gaseous at Jupiter’s distance. Methane and ammonia may have formed 
its original atmosphere when radioactivity heated Titan’s interior and 
released these materials as gasses.

14) What is the connection between Enceladus and Saturn's rings?
Before the Cassini mission, astronomers wondered if the high 
reflectivity of Enceladus was due to material from Saturn’s E ring 
dusting the surface with fresh ice. Now the evidence seems to indicate 
that the reverse is true: material spewed into space by Enceladus’ 
“ice volcanoes” may be refreshing the E ring!

15) Describe the behavior of Saturn's co-orbital satellites.
  The moons Janus and Epimetheus do an interesting interchange
  as one overtakes the other.  As the faster, inner moon overtakes 
  the slower outer moon, the gravitation attraction slows down the outer
  moon and speeds up the inner moon.  The result
  is that the inner moon passes behind the outer moon into 
  the outer orbit while the outer moon moves to the inner orbit.
  The orbits of Janus and Epimetheus only differ in size by 50 km, less
  than the size of the satellites, but they do this "do-se-do" instead
  of colliding.
  "Co-orbital satellites" could also refer to Telesto and Calypso
  which share an orbit with the larger Tethys.  Telesto remains
  60 degrees in front of Tethys, while Calypso remains 60 degrees
  behind Tethys.  These are the L4 and L5 lagrangian points of stability.
  The three bodies have the exact same periods and orbit sizes.  

[7) What would happen to a satellite if it came too close to Saturn?
   The tidal forces on the moon would break up the moon if it
   comes within the Roche limit of Saturn.  The Roche limit is the
   distance of a smaller body from a larger body at which the larger
   body's tidal forces are stronger than the gravitational force
   holding the smaller object together.  (It is about 2.4xradius of
   planet.)  If adhesive forces and bonds dominate over gravity in 
   holding the moon together, it may not break apart - this is why 
   very small moons can survive among the rings of Saturn. ]

Ch. 13 RD 8-14 even
 [7 Describe a day on Titania.
A typical day on Uranus’ moon Titania will depend on the orientation of 
Uranus and the orbits of its moons to the Sun. This in turn depends on 
where Uranus is in its orbit. When either pole of Uranus is facing the 
Sun, either the northern or southern hemisphere of Uranus (and all of its 
moons) will be in continual sunlight and the other hemisphere will be in 
total darkness. About 21 years later, the equator of Uranus will be 
oriented towards the Sun. In this case, as Titania orbits around Uranus 
in 8.7 days, and with synchronous rotation, it also rotates with the 
same period. The Sun will rise and set on Titania but Uranus itself will 
not move in Titania’s sky.]

8) What is unique about Miranda? Give a possible explanation?
 Miranda is unique because of its unusual surface
 features (ridges, canyons, faults) and lack of craters
 on one side which suggest that it was dramatically altered
 by a collision (or possibly internal forces) and the pieces
 came back together jumbled. 


9) How does Neptune's moon system differ from those of the other
Jovian worlds?  What do these differences suggest about the origin
of Neptune's moon system?
The textbook says that Neptune has "no regular moons" (those
with circular orbits coplanar with the planet's equator), but
it actually has 6 regular moons.  So that makes it SIMILAR to
other Jovian worlds.
Neptune's moons still have some unique traits. Triton, the largest,
has an orbit very unlike the orbits of the other large moons
in the solar system;  it is a retrograde orbit and it is tilted
20 degrees relative to Neptune's equator.  So Triton either
had its orbit altered by a collision or is a captured body.
It is expected to spiral in towards Neptune and crumble into a ring.
Nereid has a highly elliptical orbit, suggesting that it too
may have been captured.  Most of the other moons are very
small;  Proteus is the only moon that can be considered
"medium-sized".  Shephard moons probably exist near the thin
rings, but have not all been detected.

10) What causes Triton's geysers?
Triton is typically cold enough (<77K) to have nitrogen in the 
liquid or even frozen form. However, even a little bit of 
extra heat – from internal heat left-over from Triton’s 
past, or simply from the light of the Sun – will cause 
this nitrogen to evaporate, creating “geysers” of nitrogen gas. 

11) How were the rings of Uranus and Neptune discovered?
Astronomers observed a stellar occultation, a situation where Uranus 
passes in front of a distant star. However, before Uranus itself passed 
over the star, the light of the star flickered several times, and then 
flickered again shortly after Uranus passed in front of the star. The 
best way to explain this flickering was a ring system surrounding Uranus 
and occulting the star as well. Stellar occultations hinted at the 
presence of rings around Neptune, but the rings were only unambiguously 
detected by the Voyager 2 spacecraft as it flew by Neptune.

12) The rings of Uranus are dark, narrow, and widely spaced.
Which of these properties makes the different from the rings of Saturn?
The rings of Uranus are different from the rings of Saturn in almost 
every way. The rings of Uranus are dark, narrow, and widely spaced, 
while Saturn's rings are bright, wide, and close together. The only 
way they are similar is that both ring systems are very thin.  The 
Uranian ring system also has “shepherd moons” that influence some of
 the ring particles with their gravity, and keep the particles from 
traveling too far from the ring. This causes the rings to be very narrow, 
like some of Saturn’s rings.

13) How do the rings of Neptune differ from those of Uranus
 and Saturn?
Neptune’s five rings are dark in color, like Uranus’ rings (and unlike
Saturn's). However, three are quite narrow (like Uranus’) and two quite 
broad and diffuse (like Jupiter’s). Mysteriously, the particles in one 
of the rings are not evenly distributed, but arranged in “clumps.” This 
makes the ring appear like partial "ring arcs" from Earth.

14) Why was the discovery of Uranus in 1781 so surprising?  Might there
be similar surprises in store for today's astronomers?
Uranus’ discovery was so unexpected at the time because no one had 
any reason to expect that there were any planets beyond the orbit of 
Saturn. (Also, Uranus is and was above the limits of naked eye detection,
but it took until 1781 for it to be discovered.)
Today, we understand very well the gravitational effects that 
planets can have on each other. All of the motions in the solar system 
can be accounted for by the planets we know of, so it is very unlikely 
that we will discover any new MASSIVE bodies in our solar system. However, 
many smaller bodies no doubt await discovery, as well as planets beyond 
our solar system.

EXTRA:
[  Stellar occultations hinted at the presence of rings around
  Neptune, but the rings were only unambiguously detected by
  Voyager 2 as it flew by Neptune. ]

[  The rings of Uranus have "shephard moons" that influence
  some of the ring particles with their gravity, and keep the
  particles from traveling too far from the ring.  This causes
  the rings to be very narrow, like Saturn's F ring. ]

[The fate of Triton:
 Since Triton orbits Neptune in a retrograde fashion, Neptune's
tidal interaction with Triton moves Triton gradually closer to Neptune.
Within about 100 million years, Triton should be within Neptunes
Roche limit and get pulled apart (probably forming a new ring 
system). ]

