
Homework KEY
Chapter 6 Overview of the Solar System

Review and Discussion

1. Our solar system contains 8 planets, 1 Sun (star),
over 165 moons, asteroids, meteoroids, comets, and
interplanetary dust.  There are two main types of planets:
terrestrial and Jovian, with the terrestrials found close
to the Sun and the Jovians found between 5 and 30 AU.
The space between the planets is almost a vacuum except
for dust, gas and charged particles (mostly coming from
the Sun).

3.A planet's mass is determined using one or more of its
moons  and Kepler's Third Law.  This law requires
that we know the size of the orbit (in m or km), and this
can only be determined if we know the distance to the 
planets.  From Earth, we can measure the angular distance
between the planet and its Moon, call it A, and we can
measure the actual orbital radius, R, if we know the
distance to the planet, D using:  A*D = R.  (This assumes
that A is in radians, and R and D are in the same
length unit.)

5. Disorderly properties of the Solar system include the
way that Mercury has a more tilted orbit than the others.
The spin axes of Venus and Uranus are tipped more than 90
degrees so we consider their rotation to be "retrograde".
Some moons, like Nereid, have retrograde orbits.  Comets
come in from the Oort cloud at all angles.  And collisions
between meteoroids and other bodies in the solar system
occur fairly randomly.

7. The Jovian planets are Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
These are named after Jupiter, or more correctly, Jove which
is another name for Jupiter.  These 4 planets have many traits
in common. For example, they are all gas giants.

9. Pluto has an orbital period and size, and a composition
like the Jovian planets.  Its mass, radius, and rotation
period are more like the terrestrials.  Its density is
intermediate between the Jovian and terrestrials.

11. We know of the composition of comets in a few ways.
First, we can do spectroscopy of the comet and see which
gases are in its tail.  Second, we have sent spacecraft
to collect samples from comets (e.g., "Stardust" collected
some of the coma of a comet using aerogels).

13. Scientists use gravitational assists to accelerate their spacecraft
so that they can travel to the outer planets, overcoming the gravity
of the Sun.  They do this by planning a trajectory that brings the
spacecraft towards a planet in such a way that it approaches from
behind the planet (in the direction the planet is orbitting).  Then
the planets gravity will mostly speed up the spacecraft rather than
slow it down.

15. Galileo and Cassini took such circuitous routes compared to
Pioneer and Voyager primarily so that they could use gravitational
assists from the inner planets to accelerate without using extra
fuel/power.

17. They key ingrediant that makes condensation theory more successful
than nebular theory at explaining planet formation is the presence
of DUST in the gases.  These serve as nuclei for condensation and
so they can grow and clump together through weak electrostatic
forces (stickiness).

19. The Jovian planets are more massive than the terrestrials
because, after the formation of their solid cores, they had
a much larger reservoir of gas in their orbits to attract.
(Picture the bigger gaps between the orbits of Jupiter, Saturn,
Uranus, etc. compared to the gaps between Mercury, Venus, Earth, etc.)
The more massive they got, the more effect they were at capturing
other material.  Also, the winds and radiation pressure from the
forming Sun would be more effective at pushing away the gas from
the vicinity of the terrestrials than the Jovians, and the gas
that is pushed outside of Mars' orbit may end up joining with the
gas planets.
