
Astronomy Today Ch. 7 - The Earth
R&D Questions  1-20 all.  MC 1-10
ANSWERS

1. The density of water is 1000 kg/m^3 and the density of rock is
typically 3000 kg/m^3.  Since the average density of the Earth is 5500
kg/m^3, the interior of the Earth must be made up of high-density
material, such as iron and nickel.

2. Rayleigh scattering is a kind of deflection of light rays 
by particles in a way that depends strongly on the wavelength of 
the light.  For air molecules, the blue and UV wavelength's scatter
the most strongly.  The result is a blue sky, and red sunsets.

3. When waves from earthquakes travel through the Earth's interior,
properties of those waves, such as their intensity and velocity,
are changed by the materials they pass through. By seeing exactly
how those properties change, geologists can determine the nature of
the material in the interior.  Some seismic waves (S-waves)
cannot pass through liquids, so the Earth's liquid core is revealed
by the way it blocks these waves, but not P-waves.

4. P-waves (or primary waves) are longitudinal seismic waves,
while S-waves (or secondary) are slower, transverse seismic waves.
Both are produced by earthquakes, but the P-waves arrive
first at a distant seismograph and how much sooner can tell
you the distance.  The S-waves cannot pass through the liquid
core so the liquid (outer) core casts a "shadow" in S-waves,
but not P-waves.

5. The greenhouse effect is a process that allows the Earth's 
atmosphere to trap heat.  Sunlight passes through the
atmosphere and is absorbed by the Earth's surface where it
turns into "heat".  The hot surface emits infrared radiation.
However, infrared radiation cannot easily pass through the 
atmosphere and back into space because it is absorbed by "greenhouse 
gases" such as carbon dioxide and water vapor.  The infrared 
gets reradiated many times until it can escape into space by random 
chance.

6.  Geologists think that the outer core is liquid because
of the way seismic S-waves are shielded by something inside
the Earth.  Modelling and solid state physics also suggest
that the phase of an iron nickel mixture should be liquid
at that pressure and temperature.  Finally, the presence of
a magnetic field in planets is explained as a consequence
of a rotating, liquid, conducting interior.

7. The differentiation of the Earth's interior is a clue that it
went through an early period (estimated at 700 million yrs)
of being mostly liquid magma.  The heating was presumably caused
by formation, meteoroid impacts, and radioactive decay.
While liquid, the densist atoms (like iron) can sink towards
the core.

8. Convection is the transfer of heat through the bulk (large-scale) 
motion of a fluid.  a) It is important in the atmosphere for carrying 
heat from the surface up to the sky and creating clouds.  b) It is 
important in the Earth's interior because the best explanation for
the driving force for plate techtonics is the convection of the 
semi-liquid mantle.

9. Radioactivity (along with chemistry) can reveal the presence and 
abundance of certain radioactive elements in Earth rocks.  Some of 
these elements decay into "daughter" products (which are sometimes
also radioactive but with a different half-life, or time to decrease
in number by 1/2).  By measuring the relative amounts of the daughter 
and parent nuclei, the age of the parent can be determined.  For example,
if there are equal quantities of a parent nuclei and its (stable) 
daughter, then 1/2 of the original parent nuclei remain and so one 
half-life has elapsed.   The oldest rocks set a minimum age for the 
Earth.

10. Radioactive elements were mixed in with the more common elements
when the Earth formed.  These radioactive elements were dispersed
throughout the Earth, although differentiation should have brought 
the denser molecules to the core.  As these underwent nuclear 
fission, they heated the surrounding rock and that heat could not 
easily escape.  Initially, the Earth  could not cool fast enough 
(through IR radiation from its surface) to keep up with the heating 
by radioactivity and impacts.  This kept it molten for about 700 million 
yrs, at which time both radioactive decay and impacts had decreased 
enough to allow the Earth's temperature to drop.

11. Plate tectonics is the cause of mountains, trenches, and
most other surface features of the Earth.  Mountains are caused by
plates colliding with each other, pushing up parts of one plate
into mountains.  When plates pull apart, the form trenches that
allow new crustal material to rise.

12. Quasars are so far away that they never show any measurable
motion on the sky because of their own motion in space.  Thus,
an apparent change in their position can be interpreted as
being due to the motion of the telescope or of the tectonic plate
on which it is located.

13. The dynamo process requires both a conductive fluid (like
liquid metal) inside the planet and rapid rotation of the planet.
The liquid outer core of the Earth is likely to be responsible
for a dynamo process  which creates the Earth's magnetic field.

14. The magnetosphere is a region above a planet's atmosphere
in which the planets magnetic field controls the dynamics of charged
particles in space.  The Earth's field lines form a dipole
structure (leaving the South pole and entering at the North pole).
Since charged particles (e.g. solar wind) are deflected into 
helical paths by magnetic field lines, they tend to collect in 
regions like the "van allen belts".  The magnetosphere was discovered by
early satellites that passed through these belts.

15. The magnetosphere deflects or traps fast, charged particles 
mostly electrons and protons, given off by the Sun, distant stars 
and AGN. If not for Earth's magnetic field
these high-speed particles would be able to enter deeper into
the Earth's atmosphere and threaten life on Earth.

16. Hot mantle material, as it cools on the surface of the crust,
freezes in the orientation of the magnetic field.  Materials of
different ages show different orientations.  Reversals of the 
Earth's magnetic field occur every 0.5-1.0 million yrs.
	These reversals may effect the evolution of life if there
are periods in which the magnetic field is so reduced that
we loose our magnetosphere and charged particles can reach
the Earth's surface.  This could lead to more reproductive
mutations.

17. The Moon's gravity decreases with distance from the Moon.
The side of the Earth closest to the Moon feels a stronger
pull than the center of the Earth, and the side of the Earth
farthest from the Moon feels a weaker pull than the Center.
Consequently, there are two tidal bulges on the Earth.  The
oceans bulge out more than the solid crust, so the water level
rises near the shorelines.  The sides of the Earth near and far 
from the Moon experience high tides, while the other sides 
experience low tides.

18. Since the Moon doesn't rotate relative to the Earth, the near 
and far sides of the Moon would be at high tide almost permanently.  
The tidal force would vary a little bit with a period of 1 sidereal 
month, because of libration (the part of the Moon that faces us 
oscillates back and forth a little) and because of the varying 
distance between the Earth and Moon (tides strongest during perigee).  
So changes in water level should occur with a ~27 day period.
	The strength of the tidal force on the Moon would be about 1/4
that on Earth because of it's smaller size, but the magnitude
of the distortion would be a bit greater since the surface gravity of
the Moon is ~1/7 that on Earth.

19.  Even without the Moon, the Earth would still experience tides from
the Sun.  Since the Earth is small compared to its distance from the
Sun, the solar tides are half of the lunar tides,  or one third
of the total tides experienced now.  So, even without the Moon we
would know about the tides, although they would be much smaller and
weaker.

20. Some greenhouse effect is definitely needed to sustain life
as we know it.  Without any, the average surface temperature would
be about 40 degrees C cooler.  If the amount of greenhouse effect
increases and causes global warming, that could be disasterous.
Ocean levels would rise, flooding coastal cities, areas would
suffer desertification, some animal and plant ecosystems would
shift and in some cases disappear (e.g., coral reefs), the
food chain would be influenced in complex ways, and current farmlands
would no longer be able to sustain the same crops.

Multiple Choice
1. b a 2-inch golf ball
2. d black volcanic rock
3. a troposphere
4. c Earth's avg temp would change
5. b no molten core
6. b altitude most commercial airplanes fly
7. c human fingernails
8. b toward Kansas City
9. d occur with same freq., but not as strong
10. b the Moon is spiraling away from Earth
