
Homework from
Astronomy Today   9e

Homework on stellar evolution
[ Ch. 18 Q(How many figures...?), ] <- not used after spring 2019
Ch. 18 RD 2,7,13
Ch. 19 RD 1,2,3,11
Ch. 20 RD 1,2,8,9,11,13

-------------------------------------------
  Ch. 18

[  Q: How many figures show all 3 types of nebula (emission,
  reflection, and dark) in the same picture?
    Definite examples: Figs. 4,6,7,8,13,19  (6)
    Possible others: Figs. 0(opening), 1,5,9,10,14,20 (7) 
     Thus, 6-13 is acceptable   ]
  
2. What is the composition of the interstellar gas? What about
   interstellar dust?
   The gas is about 90% H, 9% He, and <1% metals (by number).
   The dust grains are dominated by Al,Fe,Mg,C,and Si.  In
   cold regions, they can also contain ices (H20, CO2, NH3, 
   methanol, etc).

7. What is an emission nebula?
 	An emission nebula is a region of hot glowing gas (mostly 
	hydrogen) surrounding a newly formed star or group of 
	stars.  The atoms of the gas absorbUV light emitted by the 
	bright young stars, and in return, they emit a variety
	of emission lines characteristic of the elements in
	the cloud.  One of the brightest hydrogen emission lines
	is H-alpha, which has a red color.  It is so strong that
	it often overwhelms all other emissions and colors that
	might be seen.

13. What is 21-cm radiation?  With what element is it associated?
    Why is it useful to astronomers?
    21-cm radiation is a kind of electromagnetic radiation in the
    radio part of the spectrum (1.4 GHz).  It is produced by the
    "spin-flip" transition of hydrogen (the electron flips its
    spin from parallel to anti-parallel relative to the proton).
    This radiation is extremely important to astronomers because
    it is emitted by gas clouds making up galaxies (especially spirals)
    and doppler shifting of the line allows them to figure out 
    the motions of the different parts of the galaxies.  21-cm
    radiation has given us the best mapping of our Milky Way galaxy.

[15. How does a molecular cloud differ from other interstellar
    matter?
        Molecular clouds are colder and denser than other phases
        of the ISM, but mostly they are distinguished by the
        presence of molecules (especially molecular hydrogen, H_2).]

---------------------------
Ch. 19

1.  Briefly describe the basic chain of events leading to the formation
of a star like the Sun.
	The Sun-like star begins as a large interstellar cloud containing
        cold molecular hydrogen.  Gravity makes it start collapsing
        and overdensities within the big cloud make it fragment
        into smaller clouds.  These clouds collapse fairly quickly
        (10^4 yrs) because the grav potential energy goes into 
        breaking H_2 bonds instead of increasing the gas temperature
        and pressure.  After those bonds are broken, collapse goes
        more slowly as it is accompanied by increased temperature
        and pressure.  The protostar gets hot and produces winds which
	blow away the outer parts of the cloud.  Gas and dust remain
        the longest in a protoplanetary disk but eventually gets cleared.
        The center of the protostar finally starts fusion when its
        temperature gets above about 10 million K.  After that there
        is some more slow collapse and heating of the center as the star
        settles onto the main sequence. 

2.  What are the roles of heat, rotation, and magnetism in the process 
    of stellar birth?
        Heat: heating during the collapse of gas clouds creates gas
      pressure which is the main factor resisting gravitational collapse.
        Rotation:
	As an interstellar cloud collapses, it must spin faster as 
	it conserves angular momentum.  This can actually
	hinder star formation, as the rotation tends to fling material out
	of the cloud, opposing gravity.  Thus, a rotating cloud needs a 
	stronger gravitational pull and more mass to collapse than a
	cloud that is spinning slowly or not at all.  Rapid spin also
	causes the cloud to flatten into a disk.  Although most of
	the mass is still concentrated in the center, the material in
	the disk could form into planets.
        Magnetism:
	As the collapsing cloud gets heated it gets progressively more
	ionized.  Ionized gas is deflected by magnetic field lines
	so that gas can move more easily along field lines than across
	them.  This means that collapse is slowed down except in
	the direction parallel to the field lines.  This also influences
	the shape of the cloud.

3. What is an evolutionary track?
        It is a curve on the H-R diagram which shows the path that a star
        of a given main sequence mass will take as it evolves. It may take
        the form of a dashed line for stages (like planetary nebula) in 
        which the star's surface is ill-defined.  The track depends mostly on initial
        mass, but also on composition (e.g., He/H ration).

7. What are T-Tauri stars?
	A T-Tauri star is a protostar that has heated up to the point in 
	which extreme activity on the surface generates a powerful 
        "protostellar wind".  These winds can drive away material in the
	outer portions of the cloud.

[8. Stars live longer than we do, so how do astronomers test the
    accuracy of theories of star formation?
	They study many, many stars that are in different stages
        of evolution.  They rely on star clusters to compare
        the evolutionary stages of stars which have the same age
        but have a range of masses.  Another important part of checking 
        theories is computer modeling and simulations.]

[9.  At what evolutionary stages must astronomers use radio and
    infrared radiation to study prestellar objects?  Why can't they
    use visible light?
	Radio and infrared are most crucial for studying star formation
        for the early stages when the gas is in its cold and medium
        temperature stages.  Cold H_2 does not produce or absorb much
        visible radiation.  Neither does HI.  H_2 is traced by 
        molecules like CO which produce emission in radio, and HI produces
        21 cm radio waves.  The dust in the cold gas absorbs visible light
        and makes it impossible to see through, but IR and radio
        can see warm "clumps" inside of these clouds.
        
11. Explain the usefulness of the H-R diagram in studying the evolution
    of stars.  Why can't evolutionary stages 1-3 be plotted on the
    diagram?
    H-R diagrams are ideal for studying stellar evolution because it
    has a logarithmic luminosity axis which is capable of showing a
    huge range in luminosities.  Individual stars can change their
    L by over 100x as they evolve into giants and supergiants.  Stars
    also change in surface temperature (generally cooling as the expand),
    and the horizontal axis allows temperature changes to be shown.
    	Stages 1-3 can't be plotted because there is no clear surface to
    the star.  That means that the surface temperature and color are
    not well-defined.  It may not even be distinct from other fragments
    in the molecular cloud.

[Old #  Why has it been difficult until recently to demonstrate that stars
     and protostars actually exist within star-forming regions?
	The smallest objects, the proplyds, are just out of reach of
        ground-based resolution.  But with Hubble, they can just
        barely be resolved.  Also, IR observations are relatively
        new (1980's) compared to visible. ]

[Old #  Compare the times necessary for the various stages in the formation
     of a star like the Sun.  Why are some so short and others so long?
	The times are very short for the first few stages of development,
	because during those stages, gravity essentially has free reign
	and the cloud is in free fall.  This is largely due to the presence
        of molecular H (H_2): the energy of collapse goes into its
	dissociation rather than raising the temperature and pressure
        of the gas.  As the protostar becomes hotter and denser, the
	internal pressure generated begins to fight the force of
	gravity.  This slows down the evolution. ]

[13. Compare and contrast the observed properties of open star clusters
     with globular star clusters.
	The open clusters are found in the plane of the galaxy, while
        globular clusters (GC's) are found in its halo.  OC's have 
        many fewer stars than GC's.  OC's are usually less compact.
        OC's contain young, blue stars, while GC's generally do not.
        OC's are young, GC's are old.  OC's are higher in metals than
        GC's.

[19.  How can we tell whether a star cluster is young or old?
	The age of a star cluster is determined by the type of star
	that is about to leave its main sequence.  The more massive a
	star is, the faster it uses up hydrogen fuel on the main sequence,
	so as the star ages, the more massive stars leave the main
	sequence first.   If we can identify the star with the largest
	mass still on the main sequence, the cluster's age will be
	the same as the main sequence lifetime of that star.]

---------------------------
Ch. 20

1. Why don't stars live forever?  Which types of stars live the
   longest?
	Stars eventually run out of "fuel" for the core fusion
	processes which keep them stable. The low mass stars live the longest,
	even though they have less fuel, because they burn their fuel
	at such a slow rate.  The rate of fuel burning is proportional
        to their luminosity, which goes roughly as mass to the 4th power.
        The lifetime is then the mass (of fuel) / Lum (rate of fuel burning),
        so T_lifetime ~ M/M^4 = M^-3.

2. How long can a star like the Sun keep burning hydrogen in its core?
	About 10 billion years.

[12. How do astronomers test the theory of stellar evolution?
	Star clusters provide important checks on our theory
        of stellar evolution.  A given cluster contains a bunch
	of stars with different masses but the same age.  By
        looking at many clusters with different ages, we can
	see that stars start out along the main sequence and
        then evolve off it, starting with the massive stars.
	Computer simulations can also be used to check the
        stability of stars with different masses and compositions.]
        	

[Old # Why is the depletion of hydrogen in a star such an important
   event?
	Because that signifies the end of the longest stage of
        a stars life - the main sequence.  The depletion of H
	means that the core has lost its fuel supply for the
        main fusion process, the p-p chain.  This leads to 
	the collapse of the core and the onset of H shell burning
        on the sub-giant and giant branches.]

[7. Describe an important way in which winds from red-giant stars
    are linked to the interstellar medium.
	The winds from red-giant stars contain some products of 
        nuclear fusion (these are "dredged" up during the red-giant 
        phase).  So they are a means of enriching the ISM with dust 
        and metals (elements higher than He on the periodic chart).  
        Although supernovae can produce much higher elements, they 
        are less commonplace than red-giants, so red giants make a 
        big difference in the evolution of the ISM. ]

8. What is the internal structure of a star on the asymptotic
    giant branch?
        A star on the asymptotic giant branch has a carbon
        core and is fusing Helium into carbon in a shell.  (Above
        that He shell would be the usual H and Helium.)

9. What is a planetary nebula?  Why do so many P.N. appear as rings?
        A planetary nebula is the blown off outer atmosphere of an
        evolved star.  The central remnant is a white dwarf.  These
        usually appear as rings because the intrinsic shapes are
        either spherical shells, or double lobes.  
	A translucent, glowing shell will appear like a ring 
        because there is more gas along a sightline through the edge
        than through the center.  Double lobes can also appear ring
        like when viewed along their symmetry axis.

[10. Why are white dwarfs hard to observe?
	Because they have very low luminosities.  Their luminosities
	are low, in turn, because of their small size. ]

11. How do the late evolutionary stages of high-mass stars differ
    from those of low-mass stars?
	Their tracks on the H-R diagram are more horizontal (zig-zagging
	to the right), while low mass stars move primarily upward.
        Also, the high-mass stars go through more types of fusion in
	their cores than low-mass stars, and many of those types of fusion
        can happen simultaneously because of the shell-burning that occurs.
	More specifically, low-mass stars fuse H to He, and He to Carbon, but
	cannot fuse carbon.  High-mass stars can fuse carbon into oxygen
	and also create Neon, Silicon and iron. 

13. How can astronomers measure the age of a star cluster?
	They can plot the stars on an H-R diagram and look for
	the turn-off point.  This point marks the highest mass star 
        which is still on the main sequence.  Theory can tell us the
	age of a star of that mass, and that age will be the age of 
        the entire cluster.

[14. What are the Roche lobes of a binary system?
	They are tear-drop shaped regions of space that mark
	transition region between the gravitational attraction
        to one star and the other.  In particular, the two lobes
	meet at a point between the two stars where the pulls
	are equal.  If a star expands out of its Roche lobe,
	it's out atmosphere will be pulled down onto its companion. ]
---------------------------
