
Ch. 6 The Solar System

There is a lot of material in this chapter.  It is an overview
of the solar system.  The goals of the chapter are the same as
the "Learning Outcomes" on p.135.

I'd like to expand on the topic of "Spacecraft Exploration of
the Solar System" (p. 146-147), by describing the various 
types of space missions.

               TYPES OF SPACE MISSIONS:
1) Flybys - the spacecraft flies close to the body of interest 
without orbitting it. Some flybys are intended to provide a 
gravitational assist (via the slingshot effect) onto the next 
target body.
Examples: 
   Voyager I: flew by Jupiter in '79 and Saturn in '80.
   Voyager II: flew by Jupiter '79, Saturn '81, Uranus '86, Neptune '89.
   New Horizons flew by Pluto after boost by Jupiter flyby.

2) Orbiters - these manage to attain an orbit around a target
planet (or other body).  This requires either aerobraking on the
outskirts of that planet's atmosphere or using jets to slow down.
Examples:
   Juno: currently orbiting Jupiter
   MRO (Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter): currently orbitting Mars
   Messenger: mission to Mercury lasted 2004-2015

3) Probes - these are usually a part of a larger spacecraft which 
separates and drops down onto a planet, usually gathering data on
the atmospheres and/or surfaces of the planet.
Examples:
   Cassini-Huygens: the Huygens probe dropped off of the Cassini
      orbiter onto Saturn's largest moon, Titan.
   Galileo: entered Jupiter's atmosphere in 1995

4) Landers - unlike probes, landers are designed to survive their
decent onto the planet and take most of their data from one spot
on the planet's surface.
Examples:
   Venera 13 and 14: these Soviet landers lasted the longest on
      the harsh surface of Venus (127 minutes and 57 minutes, 
      respectively)
   Viking 1 and 2: US landers that samples Mars' soil

5) Rovers - these are also designed to survive their drop onto a
terrestrial world and then travel around while gathering data.
Examples: 
    The rovers placed on Mars by the US include: Pathfinder,
    Sojourner ('97), Spirit & Opportunity ('04), Curiosity ('12).
    Perseverance: is planned to touch down on Mars in 2021
