
Astro Today 8th Ed.
Ch. 8 Moon and Mercury
R&D 1-15 odd

1. How is the distance to the Moon most accurately measured?
    The distance to the Moon is most accurately measured by laser 
ranging.  Reflectors were left on the surface of the Moon during 
the Apollo missions; these reflectors bounce high-powered laser 
beams fired at the Moon back to Earth. Since the laser beam travels 
at the speed of light, timing its travel to the Moon and back will 
give an accurate measure of its distance.

3. Employ the concept of escape speed to explain why the Moon
and Mercury have no significant atmospheres.
	Both the Moon and Mercury have low masses and, therefore, weak 
surface gravities and low escape velocities. To make matters worse, 
both objects experience high daytime temperatures because they are 
in the inner solar system and rotating slowly. At these temperatures, 
most if not all atmospheric molecules will have velocities in excess 
of these low escape velocities.  Neither object, then, has been able 
to hold an atmosphere.

5. What does it mean to say that Mercury has a 3:2 spin orbit
resonance?  Why didn't Mercury settle into a synchronous
orbit around the Sun, as the Mon did around Earth?
Mercury's orbit is not synchronous with its rotation in a 1 to 1 
ratio, like the Moon, but in a 3 to 2 ratio. It rotates 3 times for 
every two orbits around the Sun. This was the result of Mercury's 
highly eccentric orbit and allows the same side of Mercury to face 
the Sun every other orbit at perihelion. It is at perihelion that 
the tidal forces are the strongest on Mercury and this locked it 
into the 3 to 2 ratio.

7. What is the primary source of erosion on the Moon?  Why is the
average rate of lunar erosion so much less than on Earth?
There is no water or wind erosion and no change due to plate tectonics 
because none of these exist on the Moon. The primary source of 
erosion on the Moon is cratering, especially by micrometeors. While 
meteors do strike the airless Moon very frequently, Earth has many 
more sources of erosion.

9. Name two pieces of evidence indicating that the lunar highlands 
are older than the maria.
First, the lunar highlands are more heavily cratered than the maria, 
and thus have been exposed to impacts for a longer time. Any craters 
in the maria regions were filled in by lava before the maria 
solidified. Also, samples of highland and maria material were brought 
back by the Apollo program and age-dated. The highland material was 
shown to be older than the maria material, although the difference 
was not as great as expected.

11. What evidence do we have that the Moon and Mercury have liquid
cores?
Studies of seismic waves detected by the seismographs placed by the 
Apollo astronauts have indicated that the Moon may have a small 
liquid core that inhibits the passage of S-waves. We must be 
cautious, however, since we do not have seismograph coverage of the 
entire Moon.  Since Mercury has a magnetic field despite
its slow spin, we suspect that its core is metallic, and at least 
partially molten, since this would facilitate the electric currents 
required to generate a magnetic field.

13. How is Mercury's evolutionary history like that of the Moon?
How is it different?
The biggest difference is that Mercury formed much as the Earth did, 
by a process of accretion in the early years of the solar system.  
This means that, unlike the Moon, Mercury began with a composition 
of about half rock and half metal, just like Earth.  So as Mercury 
formed, it developed a large metallic core and a rocky crust.  Both 
Mercury and the Moon suffered from frantic bombardment in the early 
period of their formation, creating a multitude of craters.  Some of 
those craters were filled in on the Moon during the brief period of 
maria formation.  Mercury's intercrater plains likely formed at this 
time as well; Mercury's larger size and greater abundance of 
radioactive materials probably led to a lot more volcanic activity 
than on the Moon during this brief time.  However, pressure from 
Mercury's gravity may have squeezed fissures shut and actually ended 
volcanic activity on Mercury before it halted on the Moon.

15. How is the varying thickness of the lunar crust related to the
presence or absence of maria on the Moon?
When the lunar material differentiated, Earth's tidal forces played 
an important role in the Moon's internal development. Denser mantle 
material settled closer to the Earth; lighter crustal material 
settled farther away. Therefore, the mantle is somewhat “off-center,” 
and the crust on the near side of the Moon is thinner than the crust 
on the far side. Because of this difference in crust thickness, 
lava was able to erupt more easily onto the near side, and maria 
formed more easily. On the far side, the crust was harder to 
penetrate and maria were generally unable to form.

