
Astro Today 9th Ed.
Ch. 8 Moon and Mercury
Discussion 3,5,6,7,15 

3. Employ the concept of escape speed to explain why the Moon
and Mercury have no significant atmospheres.
	Both the Moon and Mercury have low masses and, therefore, weak 
surface gravities and low escape velocities. To make matters worse, 
both objects experience high daytime temperatures because they are 
in the inner solar system and rotating slowly. At these temperatures, 
most if not all atmospheric molecules will have velocities in excess 
of these low escape velocities.  Neither object, then, has been able 
to hold an atmosphere.

5. What does it mean to say that Mercury has a 3:2 spin orbit
resonance?  Why didn't Mercury settle into a synchronous
orbit around the Sun, as the Moon did around Earth?
Mercury's orbit is not synchronous with its rotation in a 1 to 1 
ratio, like the Moon, but in a 3 to 2 ratio. It rotates 3 times (relative
to the stars) for every two orbits around the Sun. This was the result of 
Mercury's highly eccentric orbit and allows the same side of Mercury to face 
the Sun every other orbit at perihelion. It is at perihelion that 
the tidal forces are the strongest on Mercury and this forced the
denser side of Mercury to face the Sun every other orbit.  
If Mercury maintained it's perihelion speed for its entire orbit, it 
would have a 1:1 spin-orbit resonance.  So it's as if Mercury
DOES have a 1:1 resonance assuming a circular orbit with a radius
equal to the perihelion distance from the Sun.

6. What is a scarp?  How are scarps thought to have formed?
Why do scientists think that the scarps on Mercury formed after
most meteoritic bombardment ended?

A scarp is basically a cliff that extends a greater distance
than the vertical drop of the cliff.  On Mercury, the scarps drop
off a few km and extend as far as 400 km.  They probably formed
during a cooling stage of the planet when the interior temperature
dropped and it actually shrunk in size causing the crust to wrinkle.  
This stage appears to have happened after most of the heavy
bombardment because the scarps cross the craters more than the
craters overlap and erase the scarps.

7. What is the primary source of erosion on the Moon?  Why is the
average rate of lunar erosion so much less than on Earth?

There is no water or wind erosion and no change due to plate tectonics 
because none of these exist on the Moon. The primary source of 
erosion on the Moon is cratering, especially by micrometeors. While 
meteors do strike the airless Moon very frequently, Earth has many 
more sources of erosion.

15. How is the varying thickness of the lunar crust related to the
presence or absence of maria on the Moon?

When the lunar material differentiated, Earth's tidal forces played 
an important role in the Moon's internal development. Denser mantle 
material settled closer to the Earth; lighter crustal material 
settled farther away. Therefore, the mantle is somewhat “off-center,” 
and the crust on the near side of the Moon is thinner than the crust 
on the far side. Because of this difference in crust thickness, 
lava was able to erupt more easily onto the near side when large
meteoroids struck, and maria formed more easily. On the far side, 
the crust was harder to penetrate and maria were generally unable to form.

----------------------------------------------------------

AT 9th edition
Ch. 9 
Discussion 3,8,11,14

3. What is our current best explanation of Venus's slow, retrograde
spin?  

Our best explanation is that Venus was struck by a large object at 
just the right angle and speed to slow and even reverse its spin.

8. What component of Venus' atmosphere causes the planet to be
so hot?  Explain why there is so much of this gas in the atmosphere
of Venus, compared with its presence in Earth's atmosphere.
What happend to all the water that Venus must have had when the
planet formed?
The main component contributing to the greenhouse effect on
Venus is carbon dioxide.  However, the cloud droplets of sulfuric
acid and the sulfur dioxide also play a role in trapping heat.
There is more CO2 in Venus' atmosphere than Earth's because much of
Earth's CO2 is trapped in oceans.  Venus has lost its water due
to the runaway greenhouse effect.  As the CO2 level increased,
the atmospheric temperature increased forcing surface water into
the vapor form.  That water vapor diffused up to the upper atmosphere
where it was dissociated into H and O2 which were light enough to
escape the planet altogether.

11. How are the impact craters of Venus different from those found on
other bodies in the solar system?

There are very few small impact craters on Venus, because meteoroids 
smaller than about 1 km are destroyed as they travel through the thick 
atmosphere. The smaller impact craters that do exist appear to have been 
created by larger bodies that shattered prior to impact. There are also 
few very large craters, but such large meteoroids were more common in 
the very early days of the solar system, and ancient large craters 
may have been filled in by more recent lava flows on the surface.

14. Given that Venus, like Earth, has a partially molten iron-rich
core, why doesn't Venus also have a magnetic field?

The dynamo effect for creating a magnetic field requires a liquid,
electrically conductive interior and rapid rotation.  Venus lacks
the rapid rotation since it takes 243 Earth days to rotate once 
relative to the stars.

----------------------------------------------------------

AT 9th Ed.
Ch. 10 Mars
Disc. 5,6,8,9

5. Describe the major large-scale surface features of Mars.
	Mars has the Tharsis bulge, a high altitude region mostly
in the Northern hemisphere which contains the largest shield volcanoes
in the solar system.  On the Eastern side of the Tharsis bulge is
the huge, canyon-like fault Valles Marineris.  The Northern part of
the  planet is systematically lower in altitude and younger than
the southern half, as indicated by a lower crater density and more
signs of flooding by water.  The southern hemisphere
contains its own, low-altitude region: the circular Hellas Basin.

6. Why were Martian volcanoes able to grow so large? 
	Mar's surface has a lower surface gravity than Earth and
Venus which allows mountains to reach a greater height before
the crust can no longer support them.  Another factor is the lack
of plate tectonics on Mars, which allows hot spots under the crust
to feed the same volcano indefinitely.  

8. What is the evidence that water once flowed on Mars?  Is there
liquid water on Mars today?
Many examples of runoff channels and outflow channels exist on
Mars.  Runoff channels are like old river channels, while outflow
channels are caused by more catastrophic, large-scale flooding
(like the breaking of a natural dam).  There are also what appear
to be lake shores that receded over time.  Martian rovers have
found "blueberries" and white silica deposits which were probably
formed in liquid water environments.
There are several observations pointing towards possible liquid
water on Mars today, but they all have alternative explanations.
For example, the "brine flows" or RSL (Recurrent Slope Lineae)
look like water stains that change with the season, but they
are probably just granular flows (because they only occur on 
slopes greater than ~25 degrees).  There are also gullies and
alluvial fans that are probably younger than 2 million years,
which is young compared to the age of any large scale feature
on Mars.

9. Is there water on Mars today, in any form?
	Yes.  It exists in small quantities in the atmosphere and
can sometimes even form fog.  It exists as ice on the polar ice caps.
Large quantities are also hidden under the surface as a "permafrost"
in latitudes over 50 degrees away from the equator.
Recently, brine lakes have been detected by ground-penetrating 
radar 1.5 km under the surface near the Martian South Pole.
These are thought to be liquid water with dissolved salts which
prevent the water from freezing.

